Add SOP for reviving obsolete, orphaned, or inactive ontologies (#2319)
OBOFoundry/OBOFoundry.github.io: docs/SOP.md

For a discussion on this SOP, see [here](https://github.com/OBOFoundry/OBOFoundry.github.io/issues/1848).

<a name="REACTIVATION"></a>

> ## Reviving obsolete, orphaned, or inactive ontologies

Reviewer: can you please add appropriate spacing to this to make it look nicer? it's really hard to read as is

Author: Sorry -- I'm not sure what you mean! Appropriate spacing where?

Reviewer: one blank line after headers, one blank line before lists, proper indentation for new lines within a list. You might be able to use the linting tool prettier for auto-formatting stuff like this

Author: ok, done. i'm doing this on github.com so i'm not sure how to use a linting tool.

Ontologies that became dormant and were marked as either obsolete, orphaned, or inactive require a review process if they want to be marked as active again.
Currently, these are the required steps:

> 1. If an ontology is desired to be reactivated, a member of the ontology community first makes a PR on the metadata file with the desired change in state.

Reviewer: showing exceptional community engagement is a great point. Aligning with forward looking OBO community concepts (e.g., aligning with COB, adding non-required high quality metadata like root terms, etc.) would also show that there is good faith in the people who want to revive the ontology

Reviewer 2: Lets separate these concerns. I 100% agree with you, but if we tie COB alignment and passing dashboard etc to curations like this one we will just create frustration without solution. I think we need to work out more carrots than sticks to get this done.

This PR must include some evidence that backs up the change (we will provide better guidelines as this SOP matures). Think of showing closed issues to indicate activity etc.

> 2. If the community member is not the ontology owner, the ontology owner must be contacted for comment via email and tagged on the issue. The ontology owner is given 1 month to object to the change, in which case, it is rejected.

Reviewer: A lot of this SOP is different for orphaned-> active and inactive->active, it might make sense to split these

> 3. The OBO Operations committee assigns a reviewer during the next call to analyse the evidence for the change. Only the evidence matters - no need to try and collect more evidence in favour of the state change. Note that the ontology will be required to pass the Dashboard.

Reviewer: ontology should be submitted to NOR dashboard and passing the NOR dashboard before ever being considered by the OBO Operations Committee, this is also the case for new ontology requests. 

I have prepared the testing suite to be extensible to applying certain tests in the inactive->active scenario or orphaned->active scenario, and will volunteer to make a technical solution to ensure that passing NOR dashboard is the case (if that's in line with what's been decided on, as I think this point states)

Author: i added that note about the dashboard (the rest is nico's text). i added it here because it is implicitly included in the review. i'll move it to #1.

Reviewer 2: We have now decided against applying a specific test suite when moving an ontology to `active`, and instead defining new status codes for the case where ontologies don't pass. 

There is no need for us @cthoyt to die on this hill because starting 01.01.2024, passing the dashboard is generally mandatory, and so we can really be patient until then.

Reviewer: sounds good, I don't think I was aware of the new rules about passing the dashboard when I wrote this initially, so this is actually even better than I could have hoped!

Reviewer 2: Don't get too excited, because the war room is still in session about the meaning of the word "mandatory", like what kinds of consequences will it have to not pass.. Right now it's just a pretty vague commitment that was voted in. This is what we need to work on, a set of consequences that OBO ops will pass: https://github.com/OBOFoundry/OBOFoundry.github.io/issues/2360

For a discussion on this SOP, see [here](https://github.com/OBOFoundry/OBOFoundry.github.io/issues/1848).

<a name="REACTIVATION"></a>

## Reviving obsolete, orphaned, or inactive ontologies

Ontologies that were marked as either obsolete, orphaned, or inactive require a review process if they want to be marked as active again.
Currently, these are the required steps:
1. If ontology reactivation is desired, it must first pass the Dashboard.

> 2. A member of the ontology community makes a pull request (PR) on the metadata file with the desired change in status. The PR must include evidence to demonstrate new activity, for example by referring to recently-closed issues (we will provide more detailed guidelines as this SOP matures).

Reviewer 3: Is it the case that someone not involved with an ontology makes a PR to reactivate? This seems odd to me.

Author: I think what Nico meant was a member of the community OF THAT ONTOLOGY. What would be a better way to make that clear? "A member of the ontology community for the ontology that wants to be reactivated"?

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure that's what he meant, considering the statement that follows regarding the 'ontology owner'.

Author: Oh, yeah, you're right. Maybe @matentzn can clarify.

Author: Right, the person involved in that ontology who does the PR doesn't need to be the actual ontology owner.

Reviewer 3: Ah, you refer to the contact person? This seems more complicated than necessary, especially considering that the contact person might have moved on and there's a new contact. I'd recommend something like this:

2. A person involved in developing the ontology (usually the contact person) makes a pull request (PR) on the metadata file with the desired change in status. The PR must include evidence to demonstrate new activity, for example by referring to recently-closed issues (we will provide more detailed guidelines as this SOP matures). If the PR was made by someone other than the contact person, or if the contact person has changed, the contact should be tagged in the PR so  that the proper followup can be done. The contact person then has one month to verify that the change is desired.

(delete item 3 as it properly should be merged with 2)

Author: That seems reasonable to me. We'll see what @matentzn thinks.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense to me!

Reviewer 2: Can you use suggest mode @nataled to update the phrasing here?

Reviewer 3: @matentzn hopefully I did what you requested. I could not find anything that corresponds to a 'suggest mode', just comment.

1. The ontology is added to the NOR dashboard which should be passed prior to proceeding. Fixing the basic issues revealed by the dashboard is considered some basic evidence that the ontology is indeed active. The ontology owner may request to bypass this criterion if there are a good reason. 
1. The OBO Operations committee assigns a status change reviewer during the next call to analyse the evidence for the change. Only the evidence matters - no need to collect more evidence in favor of the status change.
1. The status change reviewer presents the arguments for and against the status change at an OBO Operations call.

> 1. A vote is issued that must be unanimous in favour of the status change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If there is no significant objection, the status change is enacted by merging the pull request.
```

For a discussion on this SOP, see [here](https://github.com/OBOFoundry/OBOFoundry.github.io/issues/1848).

<a name="REACTIVATION"></a>

## Reviving obsolete, orphaned, or inactive ontologies

Ontologies that became dormant and were marked as either obsolete, orphaned, or inactive require a review process if they want to be marked as active again.
Currently, these are the required steps:

> 1. If an ontology is desired to be reactivated, it must first pass the Dashboard.

Author: moved to #1 as per @cthoyt's suggestion

> 1. A member of the development team of the ontology makes a pull request (PR) on the metadata file with the desired change in status. The PR must include evidence to demonstrate new activity, for example by referring to recently-closed issues (we will provide more detailed guidelines as this SOP matures).

Reviewer 3: A person involved in developing the ontology (usually the contact person) makes a pull request (PR) on the metadata file with the desired change in status. The PR must include evidence to demonstrate new activity, for example by referring to recently-closed issues (we will provide more detailed guidelines as this SOP matures). If the PR was made by someone other than the contact person, or if the contact person has changed, the contact should be tagged in the PR so that the proper followup can be done. The contact person then has one month to verify that the change is desired.

Reviewer 2: You should learn suggestion mode! Click on the most left button on any comment:

<img width="861" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7070631/226925721-7a4a8fd5-5352-4d91-bebc-d8a8e5658e22.png">

> 1. If the community member is not the ontology owner, the ontology owner must be contacted for comment via email and tagged on the issue. The ontology owner is given 1 month to object to the change, in which case, it is rejected.

Reviewer 3: Delete this part, as it has been incorporated into the previous step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
